# DATA EXPLORATION of GLOBAL SUICIDE RATE from 1990 to 2019
## INTRODUCTION
Every year, hundred thousands individuals commit suicide and there are many more attempting to commit suicide Every suicide is a tragedy that affects entire families, cities, and countries, as well as the survivors. Suicide affects people of all ages and was the world's fourth biggest cause of mortality among 15–29-year-olds in 2019. Suicide is a global issue that affects people from all walks of life, not only those in high-income countries In fact, in 2019, low- and middle-income nations accounted for more than 77 percent of global suicides (WHO, 2021). Suicide is a serious public health problem, but it can be prevented with timely, evidence-based, and often low-cost interventions. A comprehensive multisectoral suicide prevention strategy is required for effective national responses. According to WHO (World Health Organization) improved surveillance and monitoring of suicide and suicide attempts is required for effective suicide prevention strategies. Cross-national differences in the patterns of suicide, and changes in the rates, characteristics and methods of suicide, highlight the need for each country to improve the comprehensiveness, quality and timeliness of their suicide-related data. This includes vital registration of suicide, hospital-based registries of suicide attempts and nationally-representative surveys collecting information about self-reported suicide attempts (June 2021). Many suicides occur impulsively in times of crisis, when people's ability to cope with life's burdens, such as financial difficulties, marital break-ups, or chronic pain and disease, has deteriorated. These must be combined with the core pillars of situation analysis, multisectoral collaboration, public awareness, capacity building, finance, surveillance, monitoring, and evaluation.
## PROBLEM STATEMENT
The objective of this data entry is to contribute to an informed, open debate about ways to prevent suicide. Because of the stigma associated with mental diseases and suicide, many persons contemplating suicide or who have attempted suicide do not seek treatment, and hence do not receive the help they require. Due to a lack of knowledge of suicide as a serious public health concern and the stigma in many communities to publicly discuss it, suicide prevention has not been fully addressed. Only 38 nations report having a national suicide prevention strategy, and only a few countries have placed suicide prevention among their health objectives. It is critical for governments to raise community awareness and break down in order to make headway in preventing suicide. Suicide is death caused by injuring oneself with the intent to die. A suicide attempt is when someone harms themselves with any intent to end their life, but they do not die as a result of their actions. Many factors can increase the risk for suicide or protect against it. Suicide is connected to other forms of injury and violence. For example, people who have experienced violence, including child abuse, bullying, or sexual violence have a higher suicide risk. Being connected to family and community support and having easy access to health care can decrease suicidal thoughts and behaviors. Suicide and suicide attempts cause serious emotional, physical, and economic impacts. Suicides among young people continue to be a serious problem.Suicidal youth may also stop planning for or discussing the future. They might start handing over valuables. Many factors can raise or decrease the risk of suicide. Providing support services, talking about suicide, limiting access to means of self-harm, and following up with loved ones are just a few of the measures we can all do to aid others, according to the evidence. Suicidal thoughts and actions can be reduced by being linked to family and community support as well as having simple access to health care. Local crisis centers provide crucial support and connect people to local services by providing quick counseling to anyone who might need it.
## SIGNIFICANCE OF THE PROPOSED PROJECT
This research study aims to establish an understanding to the people of knowing what Global Suicide Scale. The data gathered in this study used as a reference in conducting another research, and other related studies. 	This research also found a significant differences in views about suicide and sociodemographic variables between students who had suicidal ideation or behavior and those who did not. Global Suicide Scale study aimed to document suicidal ideation and behaviors. 
- To the parents, the findings clearly proved the adolescent's destructive impact on death. There aren't many books out there that attempt to analyze the global statistics on completed suicides.  
- To the students, students learned about suicide in a variety of ways as a result of their research, including how to limit access to means of suicide, interact with the media for responsible reporting of suicide and early identification, and assess, manage, and follow up on anyone who is affected by suicidal behaviors. 
- To the present researchers, suicide prevention efforts require coordination and collaboration from a variety of areas, including health and education. These initiatives must be multifaceted and intertwined. 
- To the future researchers, this work will improve services and therapies for future generations as well as current researchers. They could be able to get therapies that aren't available to the broader population yet. Treatments that will make it easier for future researchers to collect data and information on the Global Suicide Scale..
## METHODS
Suicide, as a very sensitive matter, should be handled and tackled in a very serious and appropriate way. Helpful approaches like therapies and low-cost treatments must be considered to help someone in distress or at risk for suicidal behavior. The researchers will conduct a comprehensive multisectoral suicide prevention strategy for effective national responses. The primary objective of this is to assess mental and physical health conditions, alcohol and drugs misuse, and medications. Once data has been collected and analyzed, the therapists involved will develop and come up with plans of assisting the patients on their struggles. This analysis need to construct an Exploratory Data Analysis of yearly suicide detail of different countries by various paremeter 1990 to 2019. 

## EXPECTED OUTPUT 
Suicide is a self-inflicted death in which people commit suicide in order to end their life and escape reality. Suicide is a common occurrence in the world around us. It's difficult to say who it will be. Statistics show that the majority of young people consider suicide. That is why every country should have a program that focuses on each individual's mental health. Some people believe that suicide is merely a dramatic event, yet it is a serious issue that has to be addressed. There are already various hotlines that you can contact if you are experiencing anxiety or depression, but they are not readily available to everyone. This study aims to create an easier way to make people feel that they are not alone. This is by creating a website that lets a person talk to someone to ease their burden in life. People can also seek for medical assistance through this website.
## Objectives
The group’s proposed project aims to provide a more accessible and effective form of suicide prevention. It has been established that hotlines are incapable of making a significant impact on the level of suicides between nations. In line with this, the extensive online presences of individuals associated with the modern age make for the perfect environment to shift suicide prevention online through websites. 

  - Promote Awareness That Suicide Is a Public Health Problem That Is Preventable
  - Develop a broad-base support for suicide prevention
  - Promote and support Research on Suicide and Suicide Prevention.
 
Not only does this eliminate the limits of locality associated with hotlines, but the speed information also travels online, solving the issue of awareness. On the other hand, websites are also capable of offering a wider variety of services making for a more effective suicide prevention system.

## Data Sets Normalization


## Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) of the project


## REFERENCES
Ritchie, H., Roser, M., &amp; Ortiz-Ospina, E. (2015, June 15). Suicide. Our World in Data. Retrieved April 6, 2022, from https://ourworldindata.org/suicide

World development indicators. DataBank. (n.d.). Retrieved April 6, 2022, from https://databank.worldbank.org/source/world-development-indicators# 

World Health Organization. (n.d.). Suicide. World Health Organization. Retrieved April 6, 2022, from https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/suicide 

Estrada, C. A. M., Nonaka, D., Gregorio, E. R., Leynes, C. R., del Castillo, R. T., Hernandez, P. M. R., Hayakawa, T., &amp; Kobayashi, J. (2019, March 29). Suicidal ideation, suicidal behaviors, and attitudes towards suicide of adolescents enrolled in the Alternative Learning System in Manila, Philippines-a mixed methods study - tropical medicine and health. BioMed Central. Retrieved April 6, 2022, from https://tropmedhealth.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s41182-019-0149-6 

Silva, P. A. M., Arenales, M. I. D., Prada, A. M., Van der Hammen, M. C. R., &amp; Galvis, y N. M. (2020, July 1). An explanatory model of suicidal behaviour in indigenous peoples of the Department of Vaupés, Colombia. Revista Colombiana de Psiquiatría (English Edition). Retrieved April 6, 2022, from https://www.elsevier.es/en-revista-revista-colombiana-psiquiatria-english-edition--479-articulo-an-explanatory-model-suicidal-behaviour-S2530312020300485

(2017, December 23). Global Suicide Data. Kaggle. Retrieved April 6, 2022, from https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/sathutr/global-suicide-data 

Värnik, P. (2012, March). Suicide in the world. International journal of environmental research and public health. Retrieved April 6, 2022, from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3367275/ 

World Health Organization. (n.d.). Suicide mortality rate (SDG 3.4.2). World Health Organization. Retrieved April 6, 2022, from https://platform.who.int/data/maternal-newborn-child-adolescent-ageing/indicator-explorer-new/mca/suicide-mortality-rate-%28sdg-3.4.2%29 

American Foundation for Suicide Prevention. (2022, February 28). Suicide statistics. American Foundation for Suicide Prevention. Retrieved April 6, 2022, from https://afsp.org/suicide-statistics/ 

Nugent, A. C., Ballard, E. D., Park, L. T., &amp; Zarate, C. A. (2019, November 1). Research on the pathophysiology, treatment, and prevention of suicide: Practical and ethical issues - BMC psychiatry. BioMed Central. Retrieved April 6, 2022, from https://bmcpsychiatry.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12888-019-2301-6 
